Posture Monitoring System

A real-time, browser-based posture analysis tool powered by TensorFlow.js and a lightweight Node.js backend. Designed to promote ergonomic wellness and help users maintain proper posture during long desk sessions.


---

1. Overview

Modern work habits often involve long hours in front of screens, leading to slouched backs, forward head posture, and chronic discomfort. This project provides an on-device posture monitoring assistant that evaluates posture using the webcam and offers gentle alerts when alignment deteriorates.

The system runs fully in the browser to ensure privacy, while the backend manages event signaling and alert logic.


---

2. Problem Statement

Extended periods of poor posture can cause:

Neck and back pain

Reduced productivity

Muscular imbalance

Long-term spinal issues


Users often fail to correct posture consistently without external feedback. A continuous, real-time, non-intrusive monitoring tool can significantly improve posture awareness and reduce strain.


---

3. Approach and Solution

The posture monitoring workflow is based on computer vision and pose-estimation:

1. The webcam feed is accessed using getUserMedia().


2. TensorFlow.js pose detection models analyze key body landmarks.


3. Alignment metrics are calculated:

Forward head displacement

Shoulder rounding

Torso tilt and symmetry



4. A real-time posture score represents posture quality.


5. The backend (Node.js + Socket.IO) pushes posture alerts when thresholds are crossed.


6. A clean UI shows visual overlays, posture metrics, and alerts.



This creates a fast, accurate, privacy-preserving posture correction assistant.


---

4. Technologies Used

Frontend

HTML, CSS, JavaScript

TensorFlow.js

Pose Detection (MoveNet / BlazePose)

Canvas overlay rendering


Backend

Node.js

Express.js

Socket.IO


Additional Technologies

WebRTC (getUserMedia)

Real-time posture scoring algorithms



---

5. Screenshots

Dashboard UI



Real-Time Pose Detection



Posture Alerts




---

6. Setup and Installation

Backend Setup

cd backend
  
npm install
  
node server.js    # or nodemon server.js

Frontend Setup

Open index.html using Live Server

or host it locally:

cd frontend
  
npx http-server


---

7. Features

Real-time posture tracking

Forward head detection

Rounded shoulder detection

Torso tilt and alignment analysis

Posture scoring

Skeleton overlay on webcam feed

Instant alerts

Minimal dark UI

Fully on-device inference (privacy-friendly)



---

8. Future Enhancements

Session analytics and posture history

Personalized correction tips

Break reminders

Multi-user mode

Improved pose models for higher accuracy



---

9. License

MIT License. Free to use, modify, and enhance.